# Getting and Cleaning Data Final Project

This repository contains the source files for the final project og the Getting and Cleaning Data course in the John's Hopkins Data Science specialization at Coursera.

# Description

As per the project description in the course:

"The purpose of this project is to demonstrate your ability to collect, work with, and clean a data set. The goal is to prepare tidy data that can be used for later analysis. (...)

One of the most exciting areas in all of data science right now is wearable computing - see for example this article . Companies like Fitbit, Nike, and Jawbone Up are racing to develop the most advanced algorithms to attract new users. The data linked to from the course website represent data collected from the accelerometers from the Samsung Galaxy S smartphone. A full description is available at the site where the data was obtained:

http://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/Human+Activity+Recognition+Using+Smartphones"


# Files

* run_analysis.R : Self-sufficient source code R file that takes care of 1) creating the relevant working directiores, 2) downloading and unzipping the data, 3) reading the data into memory, 4) cleaning and merging the data and finally 5) saving the data to an external file.
* CodeBook.md : Codebook explaining and describes the variables, the data, and all transformations made to the original data
* /Data/*.txt archives: The raw data (this is generated by the run_analysis.R script but is uploaded nontheless to the repo for sake of completeness.

# Quick explanation of the script

Fine details on the workings of the script are in the CodeBook.md file, but, quickly explained, it does this:
1) creates the relevant working directiores, called FinalProject and FinalProject/Data
2) downloads and unzips the data, downloads the data from https://d396qusza40orc.cloudfront.net/getdata%2Fprojectfiles%2FUCI%20HAR%20Dataset.zip if not present, and unzips it in the FinalProject/Data folder if not done already
3) reads the data into memory, reads and parses the .txt files as fixed width tables
4) cleans and merges the data and finally, clarifies the structure of the tables, merges train and test sets, creates auxiliary columns, cleans variable names and creates derived, summary data sets.
5) saves the data to an external file, for the peer-grading requirements of Coursera
